                                                  OFFICIAL

             DHW Technical Guideline

                      TG001 NATSPEC Specification

1. Purpose

This technical guideline supplements TG035 Specifying by Performance and Example
and provides supporting guidance on meeting the Department of Housing and Works
(DHW) requirements for using the National Building Specification (NATSPEC) system to
produce specifications for government non-residential building projects.

2. Requirements

The NATSPEC building professional package shall be used to prepare technical
specifications for all DHW non-residential projects with an estimated construction
value of $3 million or greater. This requirement applies to all Consultants, including
sub-consultants.
The use of NATSPEC is optional for projects with a construction value less than $3
million.

3. Background

NATSPEC Building Professional package is a comprehensive national specification
system that provides standardised design and installation work sections for construction
projects.

3.1. Why DHW uses NATSPEC

DHW uses NATSPEC to:
   · Ensure standards specified are the latest versions,
   · Assist consultants to produce generic specification clauses resulting in high
       quality, durable products, and
   · Support consistency and understanding of the building quality required for
       government projects.

4. How to Use NATSPEC

Download NATSPEC Quickstart for an introduction to using NATSPEC worksections to
create specifications: http://www.natspec.com.au/images/PDF/QUICKstart.pdf

                                                              Page 1 of 4
                                                  OFFICIAL

DHW Technical Guideline: TG001 NATSPEC specification

4.1. Duplication of information

NATSPEC, particularly workgroup 01 General, may include information that duplicates
or contradicts clauses in DHW's selected Contract. Consultants shall review these
documents and ensure that only relevant NATSPEC worksections and content are
included in the project specification to eliminate unnecessary duplication,
contradiction and potential for error.
Where duplication or contradiction occurs between NATSPEC and DHW's selected
contract, the latter shall take precedence, and the duplicate information should be
omitted from the NATSPEC worksection(s).
For example, work section 0171 General requirements contain clauses governing
authority approvals, which are also covered in DHW's contract Preliminaries for the
AS2124 contract. NATSPEC work section 0171 Section 1 General Clause 1.7
Submissions states:
"Authority approvals: Notes of meetings with authorities whose requirements apply to
the work and evidence that notices, fees and permits have been sought and paid, that
authority connections are complete and that statutory approvals by the authorities
whose requirements apply to the work have been received."
This clause is not relevant for DHW projects, as the required approvals will be obtained
directly by the DHW project manager.
This may not be the only instance of duplication in worksection 0171. The consultant
shall review thoroughly as necessary.

4.2. Scheduling

Every project specification should, at a minimum, include the following schedules:
   · Schedule of all operation and maintenance manuals which must be delivered as
       part of Practical Completion.
   · Schedule of all warranties which must be provided as part of Practical Completion.
   · Schedule of all required tests and inspections, including any hold points.
   · Schedule of materials and finishes. The specification/schedule should clearly
       define the level of quality required, particularly where it exceeds the minimum
       standards set by the relevant Australian Standard. The installation shall be in
       accordance with the manufacturer's requirements.

4.3. Table of Contents

The specification should include a single table of contents. NATSPEC suggests editing
the specification templates in the individual worksection files rather than in the merged
file. The master document shall then generate the table of contents and print the full
specification. If possible, the table of contents should be hyperlinked to allow easy
navigation within the specification.

                                                              Page 2 of 4
                                                 OFFICIAL

DHW Technical Guideline: TG001 NATSPEC specification

The level of detail of the table of contents need only include reference to work sections,
and not to individual sections and clauses within work sections.

4.4. Formatting

DHW's contract Preliminaries, when used, should be amended as appropriate to suit the
project, then combined in a PDF document with the relevant NATSPEC sections and
other documentation. Consultants are not expected to format DHW's contract
Preliminaries to match NATSPEC. The formatting for NATSPEC individual work sections
will be consistent if the natspec.dot file is used.

4.5. Specification by Performance and Example

NATSPEC is a performance-based specification, although it allows for specification by
example to be used if required.
Please refer to TG035 Specifying by Performance and Example for guidance on meeting
DHW's requirements when specifying either by performance or by example using
NATSPEC on government non-residential building projects.

5. References

1. TG035 Specifying by Performance and Example, Department of Housing and Works
   TG035 Specifying by Performance and Example (www.wa.gov.au)

2. Specnotes NATSPEC's quarterly newsletter contains information on new and revised
   NATSPEC worksections and technotes, and Australian Standards.

3. NATSPEC                 Quickstart                                       NATSPEC

http://www.natspec.com.au/images/PDF/QUICKstart.pdf

4. NATSPEC TECHnotes http://www.natspec.com.au/index.php/resources/technotes

5. Specification  Writing  NATSPEC                         Paper,  October  2021

http://www.natspec.com.au/images/PDF/Specification_Writing_Paper.pdf

6. Guide Notes to Assist in The Preparation of the Specification Preliminaries and the
   Specification Generally for Works Contracts Tendered by the Department of Finance
   in the Name of the Minister for Works, Department of Housing and Works

7. Western Australian Procurement Rules, Western Australian Procurement Rules
   (www.wa.gov.au)

                           Page 3 of 4
                                                 OFFICIAL

DHW Technical Guideline: TG001 NATSPEC specification

Document Control

TRIM reference    2015/02812 DOC 01137885

Revision date     November 2025

Next revision     November 2026

Content owner     Building and Technical Services

Enquiries         Consult with content owner or principal.architect@dohw.wa.gov.au

Revision date     Author         Reason                             Sections

27/02/2016        BTS             Initial Release                   All

21/02/2017        BTS            Include document reference         Title

                                 number (TG001)

13/07/2018        BTS            Update links                       References

                                 Revise Version Control Protocol Document Control

                                 Revise Principal Architect         Document Approval

16/11/2018        BTS            Open and Effective Competition 1.3 Why BMW uses

                                 Policy product specification       NATSPEC

                                 hierarchy and requirements         2.5 Specification by
                                 clarified.                         Example.

6/07/2021         BTS            Revise references to BMW           All

                                 Open and Effective Competition     2.5 Specification by
                                 Policy product specification       Example
                                 hierarchy and requirements
                                 clarified.

23/12/2021        BTS            Updated in relation to TG035 and All

                                 WA Procurement Rules

30/09/2025        BTS            Update to DHW                      All

                                 Minor editing updates

Document approval

This guideline was endorsed and approved for use on 31/10/2025 by:
Dean Wood, Principal Architect
Department of Housing and Works

Disclaimer.

The information in this publication is general and does not take into account individual circumstances or
situations. While care has been taken in preparing this document, the State of Western Australia, its
agents, or employees, accept no responsibility or liability for decisions or actions taken, or not taken, as a
result of any data, information, statement or advice, expressed or implied, contained within. To the best of
our knowledge, the content was correct at the time of publishing. The content within should not be relied
upon as a substitute for independent legal and other professional advice.

                                 Page 4 of 4
